ARTEMIS-6077 document threat model (#6468)
apache/activemq-artemis: docs/user-manual/threat-model.adoc

= Threat Model
:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:docinfo: shared

This document defines the security boundaries, assumptions, and guarantees of Apache Artemis.
It serves as the authoritative reference for triaging security reports, guiding secure deployments, and understanding which threats Artemis defends against versus which are the responsibility of operators and applications.

Security researchers, operators deploying Artemis in production, and application developers integrating with the broker should consult this model to understand the security contract.

> Findings should be reported per link:https://artemis.apache.org/security-advisories[Artemis' security disclosure process].

Reviewer: Optional
```suggestion
Findings should be reported according to the link:https://artemis.apache.org/security-advisories[Artemis' security disclosure process].
```

Author: Fixed

Reviewer 2: It doesn't look like you changed it, are you sure its fixed ?

Author: I didn't push my changes. Sorry for the confusion!

> Findings that that fall under <<security-properties-provided, claimed properties>> will be accepted.

Reviewer: Double that
```suggestion
Findings that fall under <<security-properties-provided, claimed properties>> will be accepted.
```

Author: Fixed

> Findings that are <<out-of-scope,out of the scope>> or involve security properties <<security-properties-not-provided,explicitly not provided>> will be closed citing this document.

Reviewer: The findings are rendered without new lines. Are those findings a list?

Author: It's not a list. It's just a paragraph.

* Physical or hypervisor-level attacks on the host.
* Side-channel attacks (timing, speculative execution) on message metadata or routing decisions.
* Denial-of-service via resource exhaustion at OS level (e.g., file descriptor limits, kernel OOM) — operators must configure OS limits.

=== Code that ships but is not covered by this model

* Third-party dependencies (Netty, JGroups, etc.) — threat-modeled separately by their respective projects.

== Trust Boundaries and Data Flow

=== Primary trust boundary

Data enters the broker via:

. *Network messaging protocols* (AMQP/MQTT/STOMP/OpenWire/Core) from messaging clients.
HTTP connections can upgrade to Core protocol.
AMQP, MQTT, and STOMP support WebSocket as a transport.
Beyond these specific upgrade/transport paths, protocol switching is not allowed.
. *Management interfaces* (JMX, Jolokia HTTP, management messages) from management clients
. *Filesystem reads* (configuration files, journal replay, paged messages) by operator or broker process

=== Trust transitions

. *Messaging Client → Broker Core:* Messages from network clients (untrusted or authenticated) are parsed by protocol adapters and routed to the broker core.

> Authentication happens at connection establishment; authorization happens per operation (send, consume, create queue, etc.).

Reviewer: consume is a bit different: an authorized consumer can consume also after revoking the consume permissions: once the ServerConsumer object is created, no further authorization checks occur during message delivery and the consumer can continue consuming until it disconnects

Author: Clarified

. *Management Client → Broker Core:* Management operations from management clients are subject to RBAC.
. *Broker Core → Filesystem:* Broker writes to append-only journal and paging files; integrity of persisted data depends on filesystem and OS guarantees.

=== Reachability preconditions per component

> * *Protocol Adapters:* A finding is in-model only if reachable from network input on the corresponding protocol port without requiring authenticated management credentials.

Reviewer: Does this exclude findings that lead to privilege escalations?

Author: No. It's just saying that if you have authenticated management credentials you are trusted and not considered adversarial.

* *Management APIs:* A finding is in-model if reachable from an authenticated management client's request.

== Assumptions About the Environment

=== Operating system and runtime

* The broker assumes a conformant JVM (Java 17 or later).
* The broker assumes the OS provides standard filesystem semantics (atomicity of writes < page size, durability after fsync).
* The broker assumes the OS enforces process isolation (no untrusted local processes can ptrace or inject code).

=== Concurrency

* The broker is designed to be thread-safe for concurrent client connections.
* The broker assumes the JVM correctly implements Java's multi-threading semantics (thread synchronization, memory visibility between threads, safe publication of shared data).
A JVM with broken concurrency primitives could cause race conditions in authentication, authorization, or message routing.
* Runtime configuration reload (`broker.xml`, `security-settings`) is safe under load.
Configuration changes do not cause inconsistent state or authorization bypass during reload.

=== Filesystem assumptions

> * The broker assumes it has exclusive write access to its data directory (journal, paging, bindings).

Reviewer: Showuld we also assume a restricted access to the etc directory?

Author: This bit is specifically about assumptions at the filesystem level. The broker must have exclusive write access to the data directory otherwise data could get corrupted.

To clarify, I added more info in the "For operators deploying the broker" section regarding filesystem access.
